docs/dev_roadmap.md, before:

# Project road-map

This file contains a rough road-map of planned features.

## C++20 migration

### Minimal task list

Before migration following tasks are to be finished:
- `utl::parallel` module **(done ✔)**
- `utl::mvl` module (at least basic linear algebra ops & sparse matrix optimization)
- `utl::log` documentation
- Tidy-up the benchmarks (using standard `benchmark.hpp`)
- Tidy-up the tests (using standard `test.hpp`) (rename them to `test_XXX.cpp` for standardization)
- Write unit tests for all reasonably testable modules.

Once this is done, the current branch can be archived as `cpp17` branch, while `master` moves on to C++20.

### Migration refactors

| Refactor | Expected scope | Notes | Complete |
| - | - | - | - |
| Replace SFINAE with concepts | `mvl` everything, `math` constraints, `log` stringification | Do a double take on function requirements, perhaps specify some even more. | ✘ |
| Replace `std::thread` with `std::jthread` | `parallel::ThreadPool` |  | ✘ |
| Replace class operators `<, >, ==, !=` with a spaceship operator `<=>` |  |  | ✘ |
| Add `[[likely]]` and `[[unlikely]]` attributes where appropriate | `json` exceptions, `mvl` bound checking |  | ✘ |
| Use `__VA_OPT__` to remove the need for trailing comma support by the compiler | `predef` |  | ✘ |
| Replace some occurences of `const std::vector<>` with `std::span<>` |  |  | ✘ |
| Remove/rename some constants on `utl::math` as they are now part of `std` | `math` |  |  |
| Remove `utl::stre::start_with()` and `utp::stre::ends_with()` as they are now part of `std` | `stre` |  |  |
| Replace map/set `.count()` with `.contains()` | `json` |  |  |
| Add `constinit` to static variables that can be initialized from `constexpr` values |  |  |  |
| Add `using enum` to appropriate switch-cases |  |  |  |
| Replace macros that use `__FILE__`, `__LINE__`, `__func` with `std::source_location` | `log` macros | | |

### Sources

A listing of features added in each standard from C++11 to C++20: https://github.com/AnthonyCalandra/modern-cpp-features

### Planned features that will be easier to implement with concepts

- `parallel::for_loop()`, `parallel::reduce()` overloads that take a sized / iterable container and decompose it into a range automatically.

Commit message:

feat(predef): Added L1 cache line detection to `compilation_summary()` if feature is available.
chore(): Typo fixes.

docs/dev_roadmap.md, after:

# Project road-map

This file contains a rough road-map of planned features.

## Future C++20 migration

### Requirements

**C++20** should have a statistical majority of users. As of now that title belong to **C++17**.

### Minimal task list

Before migration following tasks are to be finished:
- `utl::parallel` module **(done ✔)**
- `utl::mvl` module (at least basic linear algebra ops & sparse matrix optimization)
- `utl::log` documentation
- Tidy-up the benchmarks (using standard `benchmark.hpp`)
- Tidy-up the tests (using standard `test.hpp`) (rename them to `test_XXX.cpp` for standardization)
- Write unit tests for all reasonably testable modules.

Once this is done, the current branch can be archived as `cpp17` branch, while `master` moves on to C++20.

### Migration refactors

| Refactor | Expected scope | Notes | Completion |
| - | - | - | - |
| Replace SFINAE with concepts | `mvl` everything, `math` constraints, `log` stringification, `integral`, `random`, almost everything really | Do a double take on function requirements, perhaps specify some even more. | ✘ |
| Replace `std::thread` with `std::jthread` | `parallel::ThreadPool` |  | ✘ |
| Replace class operators `<, >, ==, !=` with a spaceship operator `<=>` | `integral` |  | ✘ |
| Add `[[likely]]` and `[[unlikely]]` attributes where appropriate | `json` exceptions, `mvl` bound checking |  | ✘ |
| Use `__VA_OPT__` to remove the need for trailing comma support by the compiler | `predef` |  | ✘ |
| Replace some occurences of `const std::vector<>` with `std::span<>` |  |  | ✘ |
| Remove/rename some constants on `utl::math` as they are now part of `std` | `math` |  | ✘ |
| Remove `utl::stre::start_with()` and `utp::stre::ends_with()` as they are now part of `std` | `stre` |  | ✘ |
| Replace map/set `.count()` with `.contains()` | `json` |  | ✘ |
| Add `constinit` to static variables that can be initialized from `constexpr` values |  |  | ✘ |
| Add `using enum` to appropriate switch-cases |  |  | ✘ |
| Replace macros that use `__FILE__`, `__LINE__`, `__func` with templates using `std::source_location` | `log` macro API | | ✘ |
| Deprecate functions that get added into the standard library (`rotl()`, `in_range()`, integral comparators, `to_underlying()`, `starts_with()`, `ends_with()`, `ssize()`) | `random`, `integral`, `stre`, `math` | See std `<bit>`, `<compare>`, `<string>` | ✘ |
| Deprecate math constant that get added into a standard library |  | See std `<numbers>` |  |
| Replace some casts with explicit `std::bit_cast<>()` | `random`, `integral` | |  |
| Use `std::endian` for additional compilation summary | `predef` | |  |
| Switch from `C` way of getting dates to `<chrono>` calendar additions | `log`, `timer` | |  |

### Sources

A listing of features added in each standard from C++11 to C++20: https://github.com/AnthonyCalandra/modern-cpp-features

Cppreference for new language features: https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/20
